lab4/README.md, before:

# lab4

## Building

```bash
# install rust (https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/install.html)
# requires at least v1.26
curl https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh

# compile optimized build
cargo build --release

# move to release build directory
cd target/release/
```

## Usage

```text
USAGE:
    page-replacements [FLAGS] [OPTIONS] <table_size> --algorithm <algorithm>

FLAGS:
    -h, --help       Prints help information
    -s               Enables stdout logging for each page fault
    -V, --version    Prints version information
    -v               Sets the level of verbosity

OPTIONS:
    -a, --algorithm <algorithm>    Sets the page replacement algorithm to use
                                   [possible values: fifo, lru, second_chance, sc]
    -i, --input <input>            Input file for page file access numbers
    -o, --output <output>          Sets the output csv file to write results to
    -t, --to <to_table_size>       Sets the max page table size to test a range of sizes

ARGS:
    <table_size>    Sets the page table size
```

## Examples

```bash
# run lru with page table size of 10 & print page faults
cat accesses.txt | ./page-replacements 10 -a lru -s > output.txt

# run multiple trials with a range of memory sizes (10 to 500)
# output file will have the algorithm name inserted, output.csv -> output.fifo.csv
# the output file is truncated if it already exists
./page-replacements 10 --to 500 -i accesses.txt -a fifo -o output.csv

# run lru show debug info (prints array / page table contents for each input)
# probably not a good idea to use -v or -s with accesses.txt or large table sizes
# printing to stdout is a big bottleneck
# for second chance: blue = referenced, red = unreferenced
# multiple instances of the v flag can be used to increase log level:
# use -vv to display additional information
./page-replacements 10 -a lru -vs
```

The graph was created with R, you can run it with `Rscript`.
This requires a CSV file for each page replacement algorithm in the data directory following the file name `output.*.csv` with headers `table_size,[algorithm_name]` (Example: `table_size,lru`)

```bash
# install required R packages
$ R
> install.packages("ggplot2")
> install.packages("reshape2")
> q() # select workspace image with y

# run script
$ Rscript visualize.R
```

## Implementations

This program supports three different page replacement algorithms, first in first out (FIFO), least recently used (LRU), and second chance page replacement (SC). These were all implemented differently in ways to prevent unnecessary shifting in the page table.

### First In First Out (FIFO)

First in first out was the most simple to implement. Page requests were added to the table then removed in the order they were inserted. The following are the two cases when a page request is made:

1. The page does not exist in memory:

   The page is added to the "front" of the list. If memory is full, the first page inserted is removed.

2. The page exists in memory:

   No changes are made to memory.

This was implemented in with a circular queue, instead of having a specified "front" and "end" of memory, pages were replaced in a circular fashion with an incrementing position (`(index + 1) % table_size`) to prevent the need of shifting vector items.

The more simple algorithm when inserting a new page when memory is full is to remove the first element in an array or vector, shift everything afterwards over to fill in the gap, then insert the new page at the end. This is much less efficient in that each page request that results in a replacement requires shifting n items, compared to no shifting at all for a circular queue.

### Least Recently Used (LRU)

LRU is similar to FIFO in that when the page does not exist in memory, the page is added to the "front" of the list. However there were differences in which page to throw out and pages accessed that were already in memory. LRU consisted of the following two cases:

1. The page does not exist in memory:

   The page is added to the "front" of the list. If memory is full, the oldest page is removed.

2. The page exists in memory:

   Either the page is moved back to the "front" of the list, or the page's "time" is set to the current time.

Using the method of moving pages to the front of the list when the page already exists in memory caused a decent amount of overhead similar to FIFO. While it is more simple to implement, this required removing the first element, shifting all elements over, then readding the element to the front. To reduce overhead, each page is assigned a time value. When a page is to be removed, instead of shifting elements in the vector around the item page number can be simply replaced with the new one and given the next time value. A O(n) loop would have to be done to search for the page to replace / remove, though requires than moving items in a vector.
When a page is accessed and is in memory, the time value is simply set to the current time. The time used was simply a "global" incrementing counter for each insertion / access (global in the sense of all pages can use this value, but in terms of the program it is not a global variable).

### Second Chance (SC)

Second chance was an extension of FIFO conceptually, giving pages a second chance before removing them.

1. The page does not exist in memory:

   The page is added to the "front" of the list. If memory is full, check the referenced bit before removing: If 0, remove page.  If 1, reset referenced bit to 0 then move to front of list and repeat until an unreferenced page is removed.

2. The page exists in memory:

   The page's referenced "bit" is changed to 1 if previously 0. No changes if the page is already referenced.

While the implementation can be done similar to previous methods with an extension of FIFO, it would also run into the same overhead of unnecessary shifts and page removals. To work around this, the clock algorithm was used instead with the same functionality of second chance with a circular vector / array. If the memory is full and a page request results in a page fault, the memory is looped until a page is found with the referenced bit set to 0 (or the reference bool set to false in this case) while resetting any pages that are referenced. The found page is then replaced with the new page request. If the page request refers to a page already in memory, the page's referenced bit / bool is simply set to 1 / true.

## Results

Hit Rate Overview

| Table Size | FIFO    | LRU     | Second Chance |
| ---------- | ------- | ------- | ------------- |
| 10         | 0.30695 | 0.31015 | 0.31272       |
| 50         | 0.48611 | 0.51362 | 0.51742       |
| 100        | 0.57079 | 0.59756 | 0.59930       |
| 200        | 0.66477 | 0.68420 | 0.68450       |
| 500        | 0.90212 | 0.90128 | 0.90198       |

From the table above of partial hit rate data, we can see that second chance produced the highest hit rates. LRU was very close, though lost to second chance by a very small amount. FIFO was the worst paging algorithm, though when it reached larger memory sizes (around 400), it was also very close. The full data for the range of memory sizes from 10 to 500 are in [`data/algorithm_data.csv`](data/algorithm_data.csv) and shown below visually in the plot.

![Page Replacement Algorithms Plot](plot.png)



The Basics
The goal of this assignment is to gain experience with page replacement (and to a lesser extent, caching) algorithms. In this assignment your goal is to write programs that simulate page replacement algorithms. Your initial program is to accept at least one numeric command-line parameter, which it will use as the number of available page frames. 
For example:
$lru 27
or
$simulate -lru 7
should run a simulation of the LRU page replacement algorithm for a memory/cache size of 7 pages/blocks. But whence will page requests come? The answer is that your program should expect page requests to arrive on standard input (stdin, so a basic fgets(), or scanf(), call should suffice to read in the unsigned integer page numbers being requested). So assuming you have a sequence of page numbers in a text file called "accesses.txt" you should be able to run your simulator by typing:
$cat accesses.txt | lru 42

* size of memory / # of page frames accepted as cli arg
* output page number that is not in cache / page fault
* Total numbers from input file = total # of page/block requests
* Total numbers output from program = # requests that resulted in page fault
* page requests as individual #s 1 per line
* number = requested page number
* ignore trailing text or lines that don't start with a number
* terminate when reach EOF
* status outputs sent to stderr
* program for FIFO, LRU, Second Chance

The output of your program will be every page number that was not found to be in the cache. In other words, the output of your program will be a sequence of page numbers that represents all the incoming requests that resulted in a page fault. Using your program, you should be able to get two numbers from the unix command line (by counting the number of lines read from the input file, and the number of lines produced by your simulator). The first of these numbers is the total number of page/block requests your simulator program has received (you get this by counting the number of valid lines in your input file), and the second number is how many of these page requests did result in a page fault (you get this by counting the number of lines produced as output by your program - which is faithfully reproducing the page replacement algorithm's behavior).
Your programs are to accept page requests on stdin as individual numbers, one per line, where each number indicates the requested page number. Each program is to further ignore any trailing text on the input lines, or any lines that do not start with a number. Your program terminates its simulation when it encounters an end-of-file. Once again, the size of the memory being managed by your program (the number of page frames, or the size of the cache if you treat this as a caching algorithm) is to be accepted as a command-line argument to your program. Any status output (e.g., messages you wish to print for debugging/user) should be sent to stderr (standard error, in other words, it should be possible to use your program and see nothing in standard output other than the page-faults/cache-misses, by redirecting only stdout).
You are to provide a program for each of the following replacement algorithms: FIFO, LRU, and Second Chance Page Replacement.
Note that for Second Chance, when a page is first brought in to memory (i.e., into your array of page numbers in memory), it should have its referenced bit set to "FALSE." In other words, it starts in a state equivalent to having been given a second chance. Its referenced bit becomes "TRUE"  only after it is accessed due to a reference that follows the one that brought it into memory.

second chance

* first into memory reference bit = false
* reference bit = true when accessed

* graph of 3+
* which one's better

Commit message:

Add threadpool message to readme

lab4/README.md, after:

# lab4

## Building

```bash
# install rust (https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/install.html)
# requires at least v1.26
curl https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh

# compile optimized build
cargo build --release

# move to release build directory
cd target/release/
```

## Usage

```text
USAGE:
    page-replacements [FLAGS] [OPTIONS] <table_size> --algorithm <algorithm>

FLAGS:
    -h, --help       Prints help information
    -s               Enables stdout logging for each page fault
    -V, --version    Prints version information
    -v               Sets the level of verbosity

OPTIONS:
    -a, --algorithm <algorithm>    Sets the page replacement algorithm to use
                                   [possible values: fifo, lru, second_chance, sc]
    -i, --input <input>            Input file for page file access numbers
    -o, --output <output>          Sets the output csv file to write results to
    -t, --to <to_table_size>       Sets the max page table size to test a range of sizes

ARGS:
    <table_size>    Sets the page table size
```

Simulating a range of memory sizes with `-t <to_table_size>` or `--to <to_table_size>` will use a threadpool with the number of threads the number of CPU cores for concurrent simulations. Individual simulations are single threaded.

## Examples

```bash
# run lru with page table size of 10 & print page faults
cat accesses.txt | ./page-replacements 10 -a lru -s > output.txt

# run multiple trials with a range of memory sizes (10 to 500)
# output file will have the algorithm name inserted, output.csv -> output.fifo.csv
# the output file is truncated if it already exists
./page-replacements 10 --to 500 -i accesses.txt -a fifo -o output.csv

# run lru show debug info (prints array / page table contents for each input)
# probably not a good idea to use -v or -s with accesses.txt or large table sizes
# printing to stdout is a big bottleneck
# for second chance: blue = referenced, red = unreferenced
# multiple instances of the v flag can be used to increase log level:
# use -vv to display additional information
./page-replacements 10 -a lru -vs
```

The graph was created with R, you can run it with `Rscript`.
This requires a CSV file for each page replacement algorithm in the data directory following the file name `output.*.csv` with headers `table_size,[algorithm_name]` (Example: `table_size,lru`)

```bash
# install required R packages
$ R
> install.packages("ggplot2")
> install.packages("reshape2")
> q() # select workspace image with y

# run script
$ Rscript visualize.R
```

## Implementations

This program supports three different page replacement algorithms, first in first out (FIFO), least recently used (LRU), and second chance page replacement (SC). These were all implemented differently in ways to prevent unnecessary shifting in the page table.

### First In First Out (FIFO)

First in first out was the most simple to implement. Page requests were added to the table then removed in the order they were inserted. The following are the two cases when a page request is made:

1. The page does not exist in memory:

   The page is added to the "front" of the list. If memory is full, the first page inserted is removed.

2. The page exists in memory:

   No changes are made to memory.

This was implemented in with a circular queue, instead of having a specified "front" and "end" of memory, pages were replaced in a circular fashion with an incrementing position (`(index + 1) % table_size`) to prevent the need of shifting vector items.

The more simple algorithm when inserting a new page when memory is full is to remove the first element in an array or vector, shift everything afterwards over to fill in the gap, then insert the new page at the end. This is much less efficient in that each page request that results in a replacement requires shifting n items, compared to no shifting at all for a circular queue.

### Least Recently Used (LRU)

LRU is similar to FIFO in that when the page does not exist in memory, the page is added to the "front" of the list. However there were differences in which page to throw out and pages accessed that were already in memory. LRU consisted of the following two cases:

1. The page does not exist in memory:

   The page is added to the "front" of the list. If memory is full, the oldest page is removed.

2. The page exists in memory:

   Either the page is moved back to the "front" of the list, or the page's "time" is set to the current time.

Using the method of moving pages to the front of the list when the page already exists in memory caused a decent amount of overhead similar to FIFO. While it is more simple to implement, this required removing the first element, shifting all elements over, then readding the element to the front. To reduce overhead, each page is assigned a time value. When a page is to be removed, instead of shifting elements in the vector around the item page number can be simply replaced with the new one and given the next time value. A O(n) loop would have to be done to search for the page to replace / remove, though requires than moving items in a vector.
When a page is accessed and is in memory, the time value is simply set to the current time. The time used was simply a "global" incrementing counter for each insertion / access (global in the sense of all pages can use this value, but in terms of the program it is not a global variable).

### Second Chance (SC)

Second chance was an extension of FIFO conceptually, giving pages a second chance before removing them.

1. The page does not exist in memory:

   The page is added to the "front" of the list. If memory is full, check the referenced bit before removing: If 0, remove page.  If 1, reset referenced bit to 0 then move to front of list and repeat until an unreferenced page is removed.

2. The page exists in memory:

   The page's referenced "bit" is changed to 1 if previously 0. No changes if the page is already referenced.

While the implementation can be done similar to previous methods with an extension of FIFO, it would also run into the same overhead of unnecessary shifts and page removals. To work around this, the clock algorithm was used instead with the same functionality of second chance with a circular vector / array. If the memory is full and a page request results in a page fault, the memory is looped until a page is found with the referenced bit set to 0 (or the reference bool set to false in this case) while resetting any pages that are referenced. The found page is then replaced with the new page request. If the page request refers to a page already in memory, the page's referenced bit / bool is simply set to 1 / true.

## Results

Hit Rate Overview

| Table Size | FIFO    | LRU     | Second Chance |
| ---------- | ------- | ------- | ------------- |
| 10         | 0.30695 | 0.31015 | 0.31272       |
| 50         | 0.48611 | 0.51362 | 0.51742       |
| 100        | 0.57079 | 0.59756 | 0.59930       |
| 200        | 0.66477 | 0.68420 | 0.68450       |
| 500        | 0.90212 | 0.90128 | 0.90198       |

From the table above of partial hit rate data, we can see that second chance produced the highest hit rates. LRU was very close, though lost to second chance by a very small amount. FIFO was the worst paging algorithm, though when it reached larger memory sizes (around 400), it was also very close. The full data for the range of memory sizes from 10 to 500 are in [`data/algorithm_data.csv`](data/algorithm_data.csv) and shown below visually in the plot.

![Page Replacement Algorithms Plot](plot.png)



The Basics
The goal of this assignment is to gain experience with page replacement (and to a lesser extent, caching) algorithms. In this assignment your goal is to write programs that simulate page replacement algorithms. Your initial program is to accept at least one numeric command-line parameter, which it will use as the number of available page frames. 
For example:
$lru 27
or
$simulate -lru 7
should run a simulation of the LRU page replacement algorithm for a memory/cache size of 7 pages/blocks. But whence will page requests come? The answer is that your program should expect page requests to arrive on standard input (stdin, so a basic fgets(), or scanf(), call should suffice to read in the unsigned integer page numbers being requested). So assuming you have a sequence of page numbers in a text file called "accesses.txt" you should be able to run your simulator by typing:
$cat accesses.txt | lru 42

* size of memory / # of page frames accepted as cli arg
* output page number that is not in cache / page fault
* Total numbers from input file = total # of page/block requests
* Total numbers output from program = # requests that resulted in page fault
* page requests as individual #s 1 per line
* number = requested page number
* ignore trailing text or lines that don't start with a number
* terminate when reach EOF
* status outputs sent to stderr
* program for FIFO, LRU, Second Chance

The output of your program will be every page number that was not found to be in the cache. In other words, the output of your program will be a sequence of page numbers that represents all the incoming requests that resulted in a page fault. Using your program, you should be able to get two numbers from the unix command line (by counting the number of lines read from the input file, and the number of lines produced by your simulator). The first of these numbers is the total number of page/block requests your simulator program has received (you get this by counting the number of valid lines in your input file), and the second number is how many of these page requests did result in a page fault (you get this by counting the number of lines produced as output by your program - which is faithfully reproducing the page replacement algorithm's behavior).
Your programs are to accept page requests on stdin as individual numbers, one per line, where each number indicates the requested page number. Each program is to further ignore any trailing text on the input lines, or any lines that do not start with a number. Your program terminates its simulation when it encounters an end-of-file. Once again, the size of the memory being managed by your program (the number of page frames, or the size of the cache if you treat this as a caching algorithm) is to be accepted as a command-line argument to your program. Any status output (e.g., messages you wish to print for debugging/user) should be sent to stderr (standard error, in other words, it should be possible to use your program and see nothing in standard output other than the page-faults/cache-misses, by redirecting only stdout).
You are to provide a program for each of the following replacement algorithms: FIFO, LRU, and Second Chance Page Replacement.
Note that for Second Chance, when a page is first brought in to memory (i.e., into your array of page numbers in memory), it should have its referenced bit set to "FALSE." In other words, it starts in a state equivalent to having been given a second chance. Its referenced bit becomes "TRUE"  only after it is accessed due to a reference that follows the one that brought it into memory.

second chance

* first into memory reference bit = false
* reference bit = true when accessed

* graph of 3+
* which one's better
